E-GEOD-51924 : ['Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a complex disease characterized by the inability of the insulin-producing β-cells in the endocrine pancreas to overcome insulin resistance in peripheral tissues. To determine if microRNAs are involved in the pathogenesis of human T2DM, we sequenced the small RNAs of human islets from diabetic and non-diabetic organ donors. We identified a cluster of miRNAs in an imprinted locus on human chromosome 14q32 that is highly and specifically expressed in human β-cells and dramatically down-regulated in islets from T2DM organ donors. The down-regulation of this locus strongly correlates with hyper-methylation of its promoter. Using HITS-CLIP for the essential RISC-component Argonaute, we identified disease-relevant targets of the chromosome 14q32 microRNAs, such as IAPP and TP53INP1 that cause increased β-cell apoptosis upon over-expression in human islets. Our results support a role for microRNAs and their epigenetic control by DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of T2DM. Identification of miRNA-target interaction in human islets using HITS-CLIP, one mRNA library and one miRNA library']
E-GEOD-63887 : ['Skeletal myocytes are metabolically active and susceptible to insulin resistance, thus implicated in type 2 diabetes (T2D). This complex disease involves systemic metabolic changes and their elucidation at the systems level requires genome-wide data and biological networks. Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) provide a network-context to integrate high-throughput data. We generated myocyte-specific RNA-seq data and investigated their correlation with proteome data. These data were then used to reconstruct a comprehensive myocyte GEM. Next, we performed a meta-analysis of six studies comparing muscle transcription in T2D versus healthy subjects. Transcriptional changes were mapped on the myocyte GEM, revealing extensive transcriptional regulation in T2D, particularly around pyruvate oxidation, branched-chain amino acid catabolism, and tetrahydrofolate metabolism, connected through the down-regulated dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase. Strikingly, the gene signature underlying this metabolic regulation successfully classifies the disease state of individual samples, suggesting that regulation of these pathways is a ubiquitous feature of myocytes in response to T2D. Isolated skeletal muscle precursor cells from six normal glucose tolerant and non-obese males and females were differentiated in vitro. RNA from fully differentiated myotubes was sequenced using RNA-seq.']
